Capsicum Object Capabilities
============================

Capsicum is a lightweight OS capability and sandbox framework, which allows
security-aware userspace applications to sandbox parts of their own code in a
highly granular way, reducing the attack surface in the event of subversion.

Originally developed at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory, and
initially implemented in FreeBSD 9.x, Capsicum extends the POSIX API, providing
several new OS primitives to support object-capability security on UNIX-like
operating systems.

Note that Capsicum capability file descriptors are radically different to the
POSIX.1e capabilities that are already available in Linux:
 - POSIX.1e capabilities subdivide the root user's authority into different
   areas of functionality.
 - Capsicum capabilities restrict individual file descriptors so that
   only operations permitted by that particular FD's rights are allowed.


Overview
--------

Capability-based security is a security model where objects can only be accessed
via capabilities, which are unforgeable tokens of authority that only give
rights to perform certain operations.

Capsicum is a pragmatic blend of capability-based security with standard
UNIX/POSIX system semantics.  A Capsicum capability is a file descriptor that
has an associated rights bitmask, and the kernel polices operations using that
file descriptor, failing operations with insufficient rights.


Capability Data Structure
-------------------------

Internally, a capability is a particular kind of struct file that wraps an
underlying normal file.   The private data for the wrapper indicates the wrapped
file, and holds the rights information for the capability.


FD to File Conversion
---------------------

The primary policing of Capsicum capabilities occurs when a user-provided file
descriptor is converted to a struct file object, normally using one of the
fget() family of functions.

All such operations in the kernel are annotated with information about the
operations that are going to be performed on the retrieved struct file.  For
example, a file that is retrieved for a read operation has its fget() call
annotated with CAP_READ, indicating that any capability FD that reaches this
point needs to include the CAP_READ right to progress further.  If the
appropriate right is not available, -ENOTCAPABLE is returned.

This change is the most significant change to the kernel, as it affects all
FD-to-file conversions.  However, for non-capabilities the run-time impact is
minimal as the additional required_rights parameter can be ignored.


Capability Mode
---------------

Capability FDs with restricted rights are of little use on their own, as
subverted code can simply open new file descriptors with full access.  To
prevent this, Capsicum also provides capability mode, which disables a large
number of system calls for the process (and which cannot be reversed).
Specifically, any system calls which allow access to a global namespace are
disabled; this includes arbitrary filesystem access, IP:port ranges and PID
spaces.

Capability mode is implemented using the existing secure computing framework
from kernel/seccomp.c, and a new LSM hook.


Path Traversal
--------------

Capsicum does allow new files to be accessed beneath a directory for which the
application has a suitable capability FD (one including the CAP_LOOKUP right),
using the openat(2) system call.  To prevent escape from the directory, path
traversals are policed for "/" and ".." components.


Process Descriptors
-------------------

Capability mode locks down access to the PID namespace, but Capsicum-sandboxed
applications often still need to manipulate sub-processes.  Capsicum adds
process descriptors to allow this, which are file descriptors associated with
processes, and which allow fork/kill/wait4-equivalent operations in a manner
consistent with capability rights checking.


LSM Interactions
----------------

The following aspects of Capsicum are implemented as mainline kernel
modifications:
 - Annotation of all fget() calls with intended file operations, expressed
   as combinations of Capsicum rights values.
 - Process descriptor functionality (under CONFIG_PROCDESC)

The remainder of the Capsicum functionality is via Linux Security Module (LSM)
hooks, with Capsicum providing the default implementation (similarly to the
existing POSIX.1e capability code) when the active LSM does not override.

The additional hooks added for (and implemented by) Capsicum are:
 - intercept_syscall: Allow policing of system calls at system call entry, for
   processes that have activated secure computing (seccomp) mode.
 - file_lookup: Allow modification of the result of an fget() operation, so that
   a rights check can be performed and the normal file underlying a capability
   can be returned.
 - file_install: Allow modification of a file that is about to be installed
   into the file descriptor table, in cases where the new file is derived
   from another file (that may be a Capsicum capability and so have rights
   associated with it).
 - path_lookup: Check whether a path segment lookup is allowed.


New System Calls
----------------

Capsicum implements the following new system calls:
 - cap_rights_limit: restrict the rights associated with file descriptor, thus turning
   it into a capability FD (security/capsicum.c)
 - cap_rights_get: return the rights associated with a capability FD
   (security/capsicum.c)
 - fexecve: execve via a file descriptor (fs/exec.c)
 - pdfork: fork and generate a process descriptor (kernel/fork.c)
 - pdgetpid: get the pid associated with a process descriptor (fs/procdesc.c)
 - pdkill: send a signal to a process identified by a process descriptor
   (fs/procdesc.c)
 - pdwait4: wait for a process identified by a process descriptor
   (fs/procdesc.c)
